---
title: '001'
date: '2020-07-14T22:12:03.284Z'
---

Today is the day when I see someone being murdered for the first time.
It happens early in the morning, on the waking streets of Sandorgrad. I am on tram number forty-seven, as always at this hour, rattling to downtown. Having no seats left I've got to stand. From the leaden sky, a thick autumn fog descends, choking the city, banishing all colors but grey and white. I see only look-alike building blocks passing by through the dusty windows. There is no heating in the ancient carriage. My nails turn purple in the rigorous cold, as I hold the handrail. Even my breath is visible. Enveloped by eerie lights of the foggy morning, my companions seem insentient, as if they were only snoring, coughing husks. I have been using this tram for fifteen years, and I see the same faces every morning. I have known some of them since childhood. Wretched inhabitants of the slugs all of them, I included. Deep down I loathe them, but I’ve accepted their company. It’s either them, or the drunk teasers and rapists of the subways, picking quarrels and provoking trouble. I prefer the undead tram. Overhearing the murmur of a group of factory workers I look up. As one of them grins at me I notice he’s missing a tooth. I remember him from when we were both kids and he was good looking. He actually attended a school more expensive than mine. Now he's taking his morning pills with a shot of vodka. The tram suddenly stops, squeaking and hissing, startling the gloomy crowd. Some people on the station shift places with ones on the tram. A girl gets on. Bitter scent of cigarette wafts through the air as she passes me. I know her name is Greta but once I heard someone call her “Naomi” on the tram. It must be her stage name or so. I have vague memories of us playing and chatting when we were kids, but during high school, we stopped talking. She got popular, and I stayed a weirdo. Then in the last few years, I watched her slow transformation, turning a little more tired and used with every day. She walks to a seat and hops down, hugging her ragged black leather bag, still shimmering from the outside breeze. Her make-up smeared eyes look sunken and hollow. She never looks at me. Doors shut close, and the tram jolts forward with its lifeless cargo, slowly passing the grey tombs of the suburbs. We are none of us better here. I’m not less miserable either. I don’t stand out. It was all different when I was younger, before the city strangled my dreams. As a girl, I loved entering the place. I felt as if every unknown alley and shop was inviting me to discover it. I never got bored of the neon written business signs, and crowd flooded streets. Now I look out, but nothing holds my interest. At the next stop, a beggar gets on, round-backed, greasy grey-bearded, carrying two large dingy bags of whatever weather-beaten belongings he has left. Legs shaking he limps to a seat, the crowd opens up for him. The air stiffens with grunts of anger and disgust. Some step aside, some turn away, but whatever they do none can escape his aura of blight. I’m far enough, but occasionally if the draft moves in such a way, it reaches even me. Just a faint whiff of pestilence. There was a time a few months ago when I didn’t have to bear all this. Stefan picked me up at my place with his old sport coupe. He drove us all the way south, making a detour just so I could see the river. Sometimes we got held up by a red light next to the railway, and I could watch the tram pass by, taking all the damned with it. A light drizzle starts soaking the city, droplets running down the hazy windows. At the next stop, a forty-ish clerk leaps to his feet and strides out to the filthy weather, leaving a seat behind. I take a step and sit, ignoring the scornful looks, expecting me to leave it empty for the elderly. The window is just right next to me now, I can feel it’s cold radiating. Outside beyond the slummy streets, dark towers start to rise over the horizon as we rattle along. Offices, hotels, penthouses of the Sandorian elite. Stefan used to flip out, scolding the wealthy inhabitants of the towers, whenever his salary arrived a bit late. I recall the way he used to toss the cigarette butts out of the car window. Off-putting, if I think about it now. I don’t know why I liked that jerk. Still, I liked him when he stopped making detours for the river. I liked him when he stopped picking me up in the mornings. As we rush by the desolate trees of an ill-kempt local park, I realize we’re almost at the tunnel. Beyond it, the roaring inner city awaits. This is yet another reason why I take the tram instead of the subway. Passing the tunnel is like passing a portal between words. My heart starts to beat just a little faster as we enter and all lights go out. Thick darkness embraces me. It removes all defilement from this reality and lifts my mood instantly. Here all just feels serene, even though the rattling of the tram becomes nigh unbearable inside. Actually, that is the reason for the tranquility. The roaring noise strangles every sound, even the ones in my mind. Suddenly a dim yellow tunnel lamp rouses me with a flash as we pass by. And another one a few seconds after. And again.
That’s when I notice her. “Naomi”, the girl from before, she’s looking right at me. A shiver runs down my spine as I catch her glimpse at the first flash, just from the corner of my eye. I want to turn away but I can’t make myself. At the second flash, she looks straight into my eyes. Her cold green stare stuns me with such emptiness. As if an undead creature looked at me, realizing that I don't belong.
I wish I wouldn't belong. I wish I was different. Some of us never had the opportunity to change. Mine was taken from me.
I could have been a doctor. An engineer. A diplomat maybe. But the privileges of my people were taken away for the benefit of the new world. My heritage is nothing but some colourful element in my father's stories. And here I am amongst the damned, on my way to the Imperial University, not to research, but to print files and make coffee. I’m such a mess. How could I have believed I was special?
“...special.”
I become aware of a sound, quiet as a whir. As if it's coming from behind, just a few inches from my ears. Could have been my imagination. It gives me the creeps. I have to stretch and turn my whole body to see the person behind me. The tunnel’s end is approaching, slowly flooding the carriage with light, and I see a young man’s face emerge from the darkness. A pale, slender figure, with sharp cheekbones and deep-set eyes, wearing only a shabby red hoodie in the freezing cold. He looks at me with a nervous twitch - it grosses me out but makes me sad at the same time. Despite his sickly face it looks like he was handsome before he became a disaster. His eyes though. I’m stuck in his eyes. Not hollow as the others’, but overflowing with despair. Terror.
I turn back ahead, holding back a swallow, petrified. Something is not right with this guy. He’s an anomaly on my daily identical commute routine. A potential danger I do not know how to handle. Better to avoid eye contact. A loud monotonic voice startles the carriage, punctuated by bursts of static.
“Dear passengers, be aware that due to the Coalition Day ceremonies, University Square, and Alexander Road will be off limits for citizens with work-class permit.”
Right, another problem. I almost forgot about the holiday - which I’m going to spend working with all the other workies, it’s just going to be much more inconvenient.
Further traffic updates are being announced, but at this point it’s white noise for me. For a second I even forget about the weirdo behind me. I’m captivated by the sight of the colossal inner city, seemingly untouched by the fog of the lower suburbs. Its glass and marble towers radiant with golden light - a view that I can enjoy only for so long as the tram descends again, this time into its recessed channel under the streets. They even begrudge us the sight of their riches! Luckily my commuting torment is near to its end, as we approach the last stop before the University: Alexander plaza. The cabin darkens as we rattle through a short tunnel into the scaresly lit underground station hidden somewhere deep below the alabaster statues of the square.
“They have built wonders using our fear as stones, our tears as mortar.”
That whispering again. At this point I’m seriously concerned about the mental health of the guy behind me. Why am I bumping into these junkies all the time? Acting like I didn’t hear him, I look out of the window as we arrive to the station. It’s basically just a small platform with twin escalators at the end, colored purple-red by the lights of a tobacco shop and some vending machines. As the brakes screech, I feel the guy standing up behind me. I’m relieved that he’s getting off here, rather than at the next stop with me. Maybe he was just talking to himself. I decide, I’ll have a good look at him when he passes me. The doors slide open, and the crowd slowly starts to pour out to the station.  Several people walk by, mostly pinguin-like office clerks, but the guy doesn’t.  I try to quickly glance to the left, but all my muscles stiffen as a hand slowly, but firmly grabs my shoulder. My body goes cold. I try to clench my fists and resist, but my arms are numb, weakening with dread... or is it something else? A strange quavering takes over my body, and the world turns upside down. Out of the blue, I start tripping. My senses go wild, like kaleidoscopes of smells, sounds, and sights, flooding my brain with chaos. An unknown memory of an ocean storm intrudes my mind. I try to make sense of it but I can’t, it’s all jumbled up. My head starts aching, even my sight goes blurry for a while. In the pandemonium of senses a sweet alien smell engulfs me, mixed with something familiar - salty water maybe, or fish? I’m struggling not to throw up. Then, as quickly as it came, the whole sensation disappears, leaving behind a blank hurting void in my mind. I just sit there blinking, when his voice rouses me.
“She’ll be in better care with you than with me.”
He releases me and starts walking with the left of the crowd towards the exit. I want to say something, anything, but I’m rendered speechless, like someone waking from a nightmare. The electric bells start ringing, signalling that the doors are closing and the tram will depart soon. I barely get my thoughts together, when I see him finally stepping out to the station, the doors shutting close behind him. As we slowly catch up to speed, I notice a couple of hooded figures on the platform, emerging from the scattering crowd, walking towards the guy. Their features are unclear in the darkness with their hoods over their head, but I see as one of them - a curly haired girl? - steps forward, and says something to the guy. Then she pulls a gun on him. I want to shout but my stuttering is rendered inaudible by the bang of the shot. I see the muzzle flash, instantly followed by a shower of blood scattering on the windows of the tram as the guys` head blows up with a red splash. I see his body convulse and fall onto the ground as a puppet with its strings cut. Then we leave the platform behind, and I hear only the distant cacophony of screams as they slowly fill the station with panic, while the the tram speeds back out into morning light.

